.TH "OPEN-LOTTO" "1" "June 2026" "open-lotto 1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
\fBopen-lotto\fR \- Modular, high-entropy lottery number generator
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B open-lotto
\fB--game\fR \fINAME\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.br
.B open-lotto
\fB--list-games\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fBopen-lotto\fR is a plugin-based lottery number generator written in C.
It uses hybrid entropy sources, a PCG32 random number generator, and
dynamically loaded plugins to simulate real lottery draws with high quality
randomness and extensibility.
.PP
Each lottery game is implemented as a shared library (.so) that defines
the number of picks, pick ranges, and game name. New games can be added
without recompiling the core engine.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS "--list-games"
Display all available lottery games and exit.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-game \fINAME\fR
(Required) Select a lottery game to draw. Use \fB--list-games\fR to see
available options (e.g., "Lotto 6aus49", "EuroJackpot").
.TP
.B \-\-draws \fIN\fR
Number of independent draws to generate (default: 1).
Must be a positive integer >= 1.
.TP
.B \-\-animate
Display animated CLI with spinner animation for each number reveal.
Cannot be used with \fB--gui\fR or \fB--export\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-gui \fI[2D|3D]\fR
Launch graphical mode. Optionally specify "2D" (SDL2, default) or "3D" (OpenGL).
Cannot be used with \fB--animate\fR or \fB--export\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-export \fIFORMAT\fR
Export results to a file. Supported formats: "csv" or "json".
Must be paired with \fB--output\fR.
Cannot be used with \fB--animate\fR or \fB--gui\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-output \fIFILE\fR
Destination file path for \fB--export\fR.
Required when \fB--export\fR is used.
.TP
.B \-\-verbose \fILEVEL\fR
Set logging level. Options: ERROR, WARN, INFO (default), DEBUG.
.TP
.B \-\-validate\-only
Validate configuration and exit (useful for automation, CI, or pre-flight checks).
Does not perform any draws.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Basic usage
.TP
List available games:
.B open-lotto --list-games
.TP
Draw from Lotto 6aus49:
.B open-lotto --game "Lotto 6aus49"
.SS Multiple draws
.TP
Generate 10 draws:
.B open-lotto --game "Lotto 6aus49" --draws 10
.SS Animated mode
.TP
Show spinner animation for each number:
.B open-lotto --game "Lotto 6aus49" --animate
.SS Graphical mode
.TP
Launch 2D SDL2 GUI:
.B open-lotto --game "EuroJackpot" --gui 2D
.TP
Launch 3D OpenGL GUI:
.B open-lotto --game "EuroJackpot" --gui 3D
.SS Export results
.TP
Export 100 draws to CSV:
.B open-lotto --game "Lotto 6aus49" --draws 100 --export csv --output results.csv
.TP
Export 50 draws to JSON:
.B open-lotto --game "EuroJackpot" --draws 50 --export json --output draws.json
.SS Validation and debugging
.TP
Validate configuration without running:
.B open-lotto --game "Lotto 6aus49" --draws 50 --export csv --output results.csv --validate-only
.TP
Enable debug logging:
.B open-lotto --game "Lotto 6aus49" --verbose DEBUG
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B OPEN_LOTTO_PLUGIN_PATH
Custom path to plugin directory. If not set, uses \fB./plugins/\fR relative
to the binary.
.SH CONFIG FILE
.PP
\fBopen-lotto\fR reads persistent defaults from \fB~/.lottorc\fR (if it exists).
Command-line arguments always take precedence over config file values.
.PP
The file uses INI-style syntax with a \fB[defaults]\fR section:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
[defaults]
game = Lotto 6aus49
draws = 10
export = csv
output = results.csv
verbose = INFO
gui = 2D
.fi
.RE
.PP
Supported keys:
.TP
.B game
Default lottery game name (same value as \fB--game\fR).
.TP
.B draws
Default number of draws (positive integer, same as \fB--draws\fR).
.TP
.B export
Default export format: \fIcsv\fR or \fIjson\fR (same as \fB--export\fR).
.TP
.B output
Default output filename for exports (same as \fB--output\fR).
.TP
.B verbose
Default log level: ERROR, WARN, INFO, or DEBUG (same as \fB--verbose\fR).
.TP
.B gui
Default GUI mode: \fI2D\fR or \fI3D\fR (same as \fB--gui\fR).
.PP
Lines beginning with \fB#\fR or \fB;\fR are treated as comments.
.SH PLUGINS
Plugins are shared libraries (.so) that define lottery games. Each plugin
must export three symbols:
.TP
.B plugin_get_info()
Returns static game configuration (number ranges, pick counts).
.TP
.B plugin_get_name()
Returns a human-readable game name.
.TP
.B plugin_draw()
Performs one draw and writes results to output structure.
.PP
For plugin development, see the plugin development guide in the documentation.
.SH RANDOMNESS
.PP
\fBopen-lotto\fR uses a hybrid entropy source to seed each draw:
.TP
1. Linux kernel entropy via \fBgetrandom()\fR (primary source)
.TP
2. CPU hardware entropy via \fBRDRAND\fR (if available)
.TP
3. Monotonic clock jitter (timing uncertainty)
.PP
These sources are XOR-combined to produce a high-quality, unpredictable
seed for the PCG32 random number generator.
.SH DRAWING ALGORITHM
.PP
Numbers are drawn using the Fisher-Yates shuffle algorithm:
.TP
1. Initialize a pool of candidate numbers
.TP
2. Shuffle the pool using the seeded PRNG
.TP
3. Pick the first N numbers from the shuffled pool
.PP
This ensures:
.TP
\- No duplicates within a single draw
.TP
\- Uniform distribution across all possible combinations
.TP
\- Fast performance (O(n) time, no rejection sampling)
.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
.B 0
Success
.TP
.B 1
Configuration error, validation failure, or runtime error
.SH FILES
.TP
.B ./plugins/
Default plugin directory (can be overridden via \fBOPEN_LOTTO_PLUGIN_PATH\fR).
.TP
.B ./fonts/
Font directory for GUI text rendering (TTF fonts).
.SH AUTHOR
Wissem (Embedded Linux Developer & Firmware Architect, Saxony, Germany)
.SH LICENSE
MIT License. See LICENSE file in the repository for full text.
.SH SEE ALSO
Online documentation and source code:
https://github.com/Boussetta/open-lotto
.PP
Plugin development guide: docs/plugin-guide.md
.PP
Architecture decisions: docs/adr/
